Draft a revised README.md (#374)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension: README.md

# Gateway API Inference Extension 

> The Gateway API Inference Extension - also known as an inference gateway - improves the tail latency and throughput of OpenAI completion requests when load balancing a group of LLM servers on Kubernetes with kv-cache awareness. It provides Kubernetes-native declarative APIs to route client model names to use-case specific LoRA adapters and control incremental rollout of new adapter versions, A/B traffic splitting, and safe blue-green base model and model server upgrades. By adding operational guardrails like priority and fairness to different client model names, the inference gateway allows a platform team to safely serve many different GenAI workloads on the same pool of shared foundation model servers for higher utilization and fewer required accelerators.

Reviewer: s/with kv-cache awareness/with model server load awareness (kv-cache and queue length)

> The inference gateway is intended for inference platform teams serving self-hosted large language models on Kubernetes. It requires a version of vLLM that supports the necessary metrics to predict traffic.  It extends a cluster-local gateway supporting [ext-proc](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/ext_proc_filter) such as Envoy Gateway, kGateway, or the GKE Gateway. The HttpRoute that accepts OpenAI-compatible requests and serves model responses can then be configured as a model provider underneath a higher level AI-Gateway like LiteLLM, Solo AI Gateway, or Apigee, allowing you to integrate local serving with model-as-a-service consumption.

Author: A key bit of feedback from folks I've spoken with is that:

1. Most people understand what an AI gateway is
2. Most people don't know what a a "gateway-api-inference-extension" is
3. They are looking for us to more clearly define the space in between a model server + kubernetes + gateway in a way that aligns to 1

I still think "an inference gateway" (not "The Inference Gateway") is the most succinct description of our capabilities, with variants like "a gateway optimized for inference" or "a gateway extended with inference optimizations" capturing some of that value.  Since most people will use this in an off the cuff manner, we need to work harder to find an acceptable compromise term.  "Inference scheduler" or "Inference router" both run afoul of other terminology choices and can be confused with different levels of component.

Reviewer 2: I agree that `gateway-api-inference-extension` is not my favorite naming. And definitely not indicative of what our tool does

Reviewer: I think extension is what we are building here, specifically an extension for the load balancing (or scheduling) algorithm, that is what the protocol between the proxy and our component defines, so I think the term is accurate.

I agree that the naming is too detailed to be use in conversations with users, but in practice "an inference gateway" is not just this component, it is this component + a proxy (envoy, gke L7LB etc.); I don't have better suggestions though to simplify it, but I have one that complicates it,  "Inference Endpoint Picker" :)

Author: A gateway that assumes the role of optimizing inference workloads and enables fair operational sharing of a model server is a ________ gateway.  It is composed of the gateway (doing LB / request parsing) and a ________ integrated together.

Reviewer: -> is a **_inference_** gateway 

-> It is composed of the gateway (doing LB / request parsing) and a _**inference extension**_ integrated together.

Author: On the fill in the blanks, I was at least trying to imply that the extension has some purpose.  It could be an "inference algorithm" or a "request scheduler" or something similar.

Reviewer: Right, just saying inference gateway was initially confusing because many assumed it is a full fledged gateway on its own. It is an add-on to gateways to power them with inference capabilities. Stressing that it composes with existing gateways is important.

Author: I think the sentence here though is implicitly separating those pieces, so saying extension is redundant ("thing" is A + B integrated together).  But we still need a nice kernel word for what we have.  It's not just a balancing algorithm, because it's also the operational mappings between client model names and the output.

# Gateway API Inference Extension 

This extension upgrades an [ext-proc](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http/http_filters/ext_proc_filter)-capable proxy or gateway - such as Envoy Gateway, kGateway, or the GKE Gateway - to become an **inference gateway** - supporting inference platform teams self-hosting large language models on Kubernetes. This integration makes it easy to expose and control access to your local [OpenAI-compatible chat completion endpoints](https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference/chat) to other workloads on or off cluster, or to integrate your self-hosted models alongside model-as-a-service providers in a higher level **AI Gateway** like LiteLLM, Solo AI Gateway, or Apigee.

The inference gateway:

> * Improves the tail latency and throughput of LLM completion requests against Kubernetes-hosted model servers using an extensible request scheduling alogrithm that is both kv-cache and request weight and priority aware, avoiding evictions or queueing as load increases

Reviewer: what do we mean by request weight here?

Author: Do we consider token size?

Reviewer: no, we don't; we consider the current kv-cache utilization and queue length at the model servers

* Provides [Kubernetes-native declarative APIs](https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/api-overview/) to route client model names to use-case specific LoRA adapters and control incremental rollout of new adapter versions, A/B traffic splitting, and safe blue-green base model and model server upgrades
* Adds end to end observability around service objective attainment

> * Ensures operational guardrails like priority and fairness across different client model names, allowing inference gateway allows a platform team to safely serve many different GenAI workloads on the same pool of shared foundation model servers for higher utilization and fewer required accelerators

Reviewer: do we want to qualify that this doesn't exist now and is planned?

Author: Streamlined it, we should put p&f on roadmap for sure.

> * Ensures operational guardrails like priority and fairness across different client model names, allowing inference gateway allows a platform team to safely serve many different GenAI workloads on the same pool of shared foundation model servers for higher utilization and fewer required accelerators

Reviewer: typo: "allowing inference gateway allows a platform team"

> ![Architecture Diagram](./docs/inference-gateway-architecture.svg)

Reviewer 2: svg didnt get added to the commit I think

Reviewer 2: Nvm, I see it below, I think GH's rich diff tooling doesnt like relative paths.

> It currently requires a version of vLLM that supports the necessary metrics to predict traffic load which is defined in the [model server protocol](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/tree/main/docs/proposals/003-endpoint-picker-protocol).  Support for Jetspeed, nVidia Triton, text-generation-inference, and SGLang is coming soon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It currently requires a version of vLLM that supports the necessary metrics to predict traffic load which is defined in the [model server protocol](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/tree/main/docs/proposals/003-endpoint-picker-protocol).  Support for Google's JetStream, nVidia Triton, text-generation-inference, and SGLang is coming soon.
```

Author: I literally cannot remember to call it Jetstream...

## Status

This project is [alpha (0.1 release)](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/releases/tag/v0.1.0).  It should not be used in production yet.

## Getting Started

Follow our [Getting Started Guide](./pkg/README.md) to get the inference-extension up and running on your cluster!

See our website at https://gateway-api-inference-extension.sigs.k8s.io/ for detailed API documentation on leveraging our Kubernetes-native declarative APIs

> ## Status

Reviewer: Status is duplicated, there is a subsection above

The inference gateway improves the tail latency and throughput of LLM completion requests against Kubernetes-hosted model servers using an extensible request scheduling alogrithm that is both kv-cache and request weight and priority aware, avoiding evictions or queueing as load increases. It provides Kubernetes-native declarative APIs to route client model names to use-case specific LoRA adapters and control incremental rollout of new adapter versions, A/B traffic splitting, and safe blue-green base model and model server upgrades. By adding operational guardrails like priority and fairness to different client model names, the inference gateway allows a platform team to safely serve many different GenAI workloads on the same pool of shared foundation model servers for higher utilization and fewer required accelerators.

> It currently requires a version of vLLM that supports the necessary metrics to predict traffic load which is defined in the [model server protocol](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18VRJ2ufZmAwBZ2jArfvGjQGaWtsQtAP6_yF2Xn6zcms/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.i6dojwsuaskj).  Support for Jetspeed, nVidia Triton, text-generation-inference, and SGLang is coming soon.

Reviewer: The doc is out-of-date, here is the latest one: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api-inference-extension/tree/main/docs/proposals/003-endpoint-picker-protocol
